Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak originating from Wuhan, China in late 2019 has spread worldwide claiming more than 2.5 million lives all over the world as of 01 March 2021 (1). On 11 March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared it as a pandemic (1). Since the outbreak of the disease WHO through its guidelines has prioritized the actions for responding to the virus; urged the government to maintain health facilities, raise public awareness, and stock up on medical supplies (2).

Several modeling studies have been conducted during the early phases of the outbreak to predict the epidemic and effectiveness of multiple population-wide strategies, including lockdown, social distancing, quarantine, testing and contact tracing, and media-related awareness among others to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 (3–9). The strict lockdown was enforced to limit the spread of COVID-19 in countries such as Italy, Spain, France, the UK after the steady rise in cases whereas Nepal introduced lockdown during the early phase of the pandemic (10). Lockdown is the blanket approach that buys time to prepare the healthcare system (active case finding through testing and tracing, case management, for example, quarantine, isolation and treatment, and availability of protective equipment) to confine the virus and its spread. The Government of Nepal issued a nationwide lockdown from 24 March to 21 July 2020, prohibiting domestic and international travels, closure of border and non-essential services in the first stage, which was later eased on 11 June 2020.

The basic reproduction number (R0) which measures the potential transmission of an infectious disease is a fundamental metric to determine if an outbreak is expected to continue. In general, the disease is expected to spread and become epidemic if R0 is more than one and to decline and ultimately end if R0 is <1. The R0 value of the COVID-19 outbreak was not available for Nepal when the government was preparing for the lockdown. However, in neighboring countries, the estimated R0 value of coronavirus was above 2.0 in India (4) and between 2.2 to 3.5 in China (11), indicating a potential to cause an outbreak. There were only two confirmed cases from 610 Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) tests and no fatalities before lockdown (12). The indexed case was found on 23 January 2020 in Kathmandu on a person who had traveled from Wuhan, China (13). The second case was confirmed 2 months later on 23 March who had traveled to Nepal from France via Qatar (14).

This study aimed to assess the overall scenario of COVID-19 during the lockdown (positive cases, RT-PCR test performed, recoveries, total active and deaths cases including case fatality ratio) including spatial distribution of the cases, government measures to manage the pandemic; and impacts on public health, socio-economy, and education. Finally, we offer helpful suggestions to address the challenges brought by the impact of COVID-19.